Docs page on measuring in Pauli basis (#323)
Qiskit/documentation: docs/build/specify-observables-pauli.mdx

---
title: Specify observables in the Pauli basis
description: Measure circuits in different Pauli bases, which is required to measure observables that are not diagonal in the computational basis.

---

> # Specify observables in the Pauli basis

Reviewer: For the specify section are there any other code snippets we can add in? Ultimately we want to show off what qiskit can do here, so if there are any other code snippets that could be added that would be ideal. It would also help break up the text a bit as right now the first section feels a bit like a wall of text and equations

Author: I added another one on operator construction. A more in-depth site could also go in detail of how Paulis are represented in Qiskit with different classes, maybe we could add that as follow-up

In quantum mechanics, observables correspond to physical properties that can be measured.

> If we are dealing with system of spins, for example, we could be interested in measuring the system's energy or obtaining information about the alignment of the spins, such as the magnetization or the correlations between spins.
> 
> To measure an $n$-qubit observable $O$ on a quantum computer, we have to represent it as sum of tensor products of Pauli operators, that is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When considering a system of spins, for example, you could be interested in measuring the system's energy or obtaining information about the alignment of the spins, such as the magnetization or the correlations between spins.

To measure an $n$-qubit observable $O$ on a quantum computer, you must represent it as a sum of tensor products of Pauli operators, that is
```

$$
O = \sum_{k=1}^K \alpha_k P_k,~~ P_k \in \{I, X, Y, Z\}^{\otimes n},~~ \alpha_k \in \mathbb{R},
$$

where 

$$
I = \begin{pmatrix}
1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1
\end{pmatrix}
~~
X = \begin{pmatrix}
0 & 1 \\ 1 & 0
\end{pmatrix}
~~
Y = \begin{pmatrix}
0 & -i \\ i & 0
\end{pmatrix}
~~
Z = \begin{pmatrix}
1 & 0 \\ 0 & -1
\end{pmatrix}
$$

and we use the fact that an observable is hermitian, i.e. $O^\dagger = O$. If $O$ is not hermitian it can still be decomposed as sum of Paulis, but the coefficient $\alpha_k$ become complex.

In many cases, the observable is naturally specified in this representation after mapping the system of interest to qubits.
For example, a spin-1/2 system can be mapped to an Ising Hamiltonian

$$
H = \sum_{\langle i, j\rangle} Z_i Z_j + \sum_{i=1}^n X_i,
$$

where the indices $\langle i, j\rangle$ run over interacting spins and the spins are subject to a transversal field in $X$.
The subscript index indicates which qubit the Pauli operator acts on, i.e. $X_i$ acts with an $X$ on qubit $i$ and leaves the rest unchanged.

> If we would like to measure the energy the observable is the Hamiltonian itself. Alternatively, we could measure the 

Author: She added a comma inbetween the same words further below, so I think you're right 🙂

> The subscript index indicates which qubit the Pauli operator acts on, i.e. $X_i$ acts with an $X$ on qubit $i$ and leaves the rest unchanged.
> If we would like to measure the energy the observable is the Hamiltonian itself. Alternatively, we could measure the 
> average magnetization by counting the number of spins aligned in the $Z$-direction by
> 
> $$
> O = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1} Z_i
> $$
> 
> If, instead, the observable is given in a matrix form, it can be expressed as Paulis by using the fact that the Pauli terms form a basis for the complex $2^n \times 2^n$ matrices.
> We expand the observable $O$ as 
> 
> $$
> O = \sum_{P \in \{I, X, Y, Z\}^{\otimes n}} \mathrm{Tr}(O P) P,
> $$
> 
> where the sum runs over all possible $n$-qubit Pauli terms and $\mathrm{Tr}(\cdot)$ is the trace of a matrix, which acts as inner product.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The subscript index indicates which qubit the Pauli operator acts on. $X_i$ acts with an $X$ on qubit $i$ and leaves the rest unchanged.
If you want to measure the energy, the observable is the Hamiltonian itself. Alternatively, you could measure the 
average magnetization by counting the number of spins aligned in the $Z$-direction by

$$
O = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1} Z_i
$$

If, instead, the observable is given in a matrix form, it can be expressed as Paulis by using the fact that the Pauli terms form a basis for the complex $2^n \times 2^n$ matrices.
We expand the observable $O$ as 

$$
O = \sum_{P \in \{I, X, Y, Z\}^{\otimes n}} \mathrm{Tr}(O P) P,
$$

where the sum runs over all possible $n$-qubit Pauli terms and $\mathrm{Tr}(\cdot)$ is the trace of a matrix, which acts as an inner product.
```

Qiskit implements this decomposition in the `SparsePauliOp.from_operator` method:

```python
import numpy as np
from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp

matrix = np.array([[-1, 0, 0.5, -1],
		   [0, 1, 1, 0.5],
		   [0.5, 1, -1, 0],
		   [-1, 0.5, 0, 1]])

observable = SparsePauliOp.from_operator(matrix)
print(observable)  
```

which prints

```
SparsePauliOp(['IZ', 'XI', 'YY'], coeffs=[-1. +0.j,  0.5+0.j,  1. +0.j])
```

> This means the matrix can be written as Pauli terms as $O = -Z_1 + 0.5 X_2 + Y_2 Y_1$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means the matrix can be written in Pauli terms as $O = -Z_1 + 0.5 X_2 + Y_2 Y_1$.
```

Note that the tensor product order maps to qubits as $q_n \otimes q_{n-1} \otimes \cdots \otimes q_1$.

# Measuring in Pauli bases

> A measurement projects the qubit state to the computational basis $\{|0\rangle, |1\rangle\}$. This implies that we can only measure observables that are diagonal in this basis, such as Paulis consisting only of $I$ and $Z$ terms.
> Measuring arbitrary Pauli terms therefore requires a change of basis to diagonalize them. To do this, we perform the following transformations,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A measurement projects the qubit state to the computational basis $\{|0\rangle, |1\rangle\}$. This implies that you can only measure observables that are diagonal in this basis, such as Paulis consisting only of $I$ and $Z$ terms.
Measuring arbitrary Pauli terms therefore requires a change of basis to diagonalize them. To do this, perform the following transformations,
```

$$
\begin{aligned}
    X &\rightarrow Z = H X H \\
    Y &\rightarrow Z = H S^\dagger Y S H,
\end{aligned}
$$

where $H$ is the Hadamard gate and $S = \sqrt{Z}$ is sometimes referred to as the phase gate. 
If you are using an [Estimator](../api/qiskit/qiskit.primitives.Estimator) to compute expectation values, the basis transformations are automatically performed.

Below is an example demonstrating how to prepare a quantum circuit and manually measure the qubits in the X, Y, and Z bases:

> ```python

Reviewer: tbh I'm a little lost with this code snippet 😅 maybe it would help to draw the circuits out so we can visually see what gates are being added? Or add a bit more explanation before the code?

for example, I think this is the most helpful bit of info but bc it was in the code comment I almost skipped over it, could you move it out into the main text?

> create a circuit, where we would like to measure
q0 in the X basis, q1 in the Y basis and q2 in the Z basis

Author: done 🙂

$$
O = \sum_{k=1}^K \alpha_k P_k,~~ P_k \in \{I, X, Y, Z\}^{\otimes n},~~ \alpha_k \in \mathbb{R},
$$

where 

$$
I = \begin{pmatrix}
1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1
\end{pmatrix}
~~
X = \begin{pmatrix}
0 & 1 \\ 1 & 0
\end{pmatrix}
~~
Y = \begin{pmatrix}
0 & -i \\ i & 0
\end{pmatrix}
~~
Z = \begin{pmatrix}
1 & 0 \\ 0 & -1
\end{pmatrix}
$$

and you use the fact that an observable is Hermitian, as in, $O^\dagger = O$. If $O$ is not Hermitian it can still be decomposed as a sum of Paulis, but the coefficient $\alpha_k$ becomes complex.

In many cases, the observable is naturally specified in this representation after mapping the system of interest to qubits.
For example, a spin-1/2 system can be mapped to an Ising Hamiltonian

$$
H = \sum_{\langle i, j\rangle} Z_i Z_j - \sum_{i=1}^n X_i,
$$

where the indices $\langle i, j\rangle$ run over interacting spins and the spins are subject to a transversal field in $X$.
The subscript index indicates which qubit the Pauli operator acts on, i.e. $X_i$ applies an $X$ operator on qubit $i$ and leaves the rest unchanged.
In Qiskit, this Hamiltonian could be constructed as 

> ```python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python
from qiskit.quantum_info import SparsePauliOp
```
